animal protein and plant protein are
totally different and if you have a diet
of plant protein it is very hard to
sustain and calorically devastating
because you need between 25 and 40
percent more so it's like six cups of
quinoa for one small chicken breast
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr gabrielle lyon she's
a functional medicine doctor who
completed her fellowship in nutrition
and geriatrics from washington
university one of the best medical
schools in the world she's board
certified in family medicine has a
doctorate in osteopathy has her own
clinical practice and has made a name
for herself by taking an integrative
muscle-centric approach to health and
wellness
welcome to the show
thank you for having me yeah for sure
i'm super fascinated by your
muscle-centric approach and that was
sort of the very beginning of my journey
was realizing if i wanted to get the
body composition that i wanted to get
that i needed to put on some muscle um
and you're the first person i've heard
talk specifically about taking a
muscle-centric approach so i'd love if
you um just quickly give like a
rapid description of what it means to be
sort of muscle-centric that'd be amazing
so i practiced this concept of
muscle-centric medicine and it's really
this idea that muscle is the organ of
longevity right now everybody focuses on
adiposity being over fat there's the
constant struggle against the bulge but
that's the wrong way of thinking it's
not about being over fat that is
just
the
byproduct of being under muscle so the
true
way to fix everything is optimizing
muscle tissue and really changing the
paradigm of thinking it's not about
being over fat which is why it hasn't
worked
it truly is
from a metabolic perspective about being
under-muscled
so talk to me a little bit about um when
we look at what it means to be optimized
for muscle mass i get why being obese
is wildly problematic um fat itself is
an organ it's a sign it signals to the
rest of the body it's pro-inflammatory
um it can hurt joints just in terms of
being too much weight
one why hasn't focusing on that worked
and then two why is muscle the answer um
to the problem
yeah certainly well it's kind of like
what you focus on you get more of
and by constantly focusing on the
pathology
of adipose tissue
it's the wrong perspective and i think
that that's largely what's wrong with
the western medicine approach it's
constantly chasing
the
outside pathology as opposed to a
symptom
yeah it's a and when you do that you're
constantly chasing your tail
but
really it's truly an issue of
muscle tissue so
defects and issues with the muscle
actually happen first
adiposity is secondary and how i really
like to think about it is it's like a
suitcase
stuffing you know a whole bunch of stuff
into a suitcase which would be
carbohydrates or glycogen and really
over packing it and then
having things spill back out and that's
exactly and then when it spills back out
that's when you get fat right so i had
an employee who used to be an olympic
level swimmer and when he detailed what
he ate i was like bro you are going to
die so soon this is crazy how are you
not morbidly obese he was like eating
french fries and chicken nuggets from
mcdonald's and eating something like 12
000 calories i could be a little off but
it was so absurdly high that i was like
this is insane and he was quite lean so
is the hypothesis the reason he was lean
that he's using his muscles
so much and he's in a state of burning
the carbohydrates at such a ridiculously
high level that he's sort of unable to
put on the fat because the muscles are
essentially taking care of it and that's
a really good framework to think about
it there that would be multifactorial
certainly the amount of output that he
has with all that activity he's
utilizing a ton of carbohydrates
because he's a carbohydrate adapted
athlete as opposed to say
someone who eats less carbohydrates and
more fat so the reason he didn't get fat
was probably number one he was young
his hormones were good
right high testosterone and he was
putting in so many hours that he was
utilizing everything
so people have i think a high level
understanding of there are three
macronutrients and they probably have
heard things like carbohydrates cause
you to store fat and water
that the muscles burn
glucose like at that level
but my question is where it begins to
get fuzzy for people is like what's
happening when you use your muscle like
muscle mass even just having it is going
to be protective is going to allow you
to consume more calories without putting
on adipose tissue so i think explaining
to people maybe the function of muscle
as an organ
would be really helpful
oh my pleasure probably my favorite
topic so
muscle as your metabolic currency it is
largely responsible for your resting
metabolic rate which is really
essentially the calories that you burn
at breast
it is one of the largest sites for
glucose disposal which is exactly what
you were talking about whatever twinkie
diet he was on was being utilized by the
muscle tissue
and another component of skeletal muscle
is that it's a site of fatty acid
oxidation so we hear a lot about high
cholesterol well actually muscle
is so metabolically active that's one of
the fuels that it uses so truly the
three components of muscle as a
metabolic organ are number one resting
metabolic rate it determines everything
about what you're doing muscle mass is
incredibly unique in multiple different
ways you know really not just as
locomotion which i think in our 20s we
all think about muscle as locomotion and
looking good in a bikini or mankini
whatever you choose but really the the
true essence and the true benefits of
muscle are far beyond that just as its
ability to utilize calories utilize
energy and you know of course we have to
get into the topic of the importance of
high quality protein which i'm sure that
we'll talk about but muscle in and of
itself is so interesting it's actually
an endocrine organ
so when you contract it it secretes
things it secretes proteins one of these
proteins are called you know this group
of proteins is essentially called
myokines
so it's responsible for all those things
that i mentioned the resting metabolic
rate the glucose disposal fatty acid
oxidation but also interestingly just as
you had pointed out of the uh fat
adipose tissue being an organ which is
the nemesis of muscle
right it's the nemesis of muscle muscle
in itself when you contract it also
secretes things these myoclines go
throughout the body and are
anti-inflammatory things like
interleukin-6 bdnf for brain function
it's just multi there's just there's
many many
so bdnf is is something brain-derived
neurotropic factor if i'm uh getting
that right so that's the
people have referred to it as sort of a
feel-good chemical so you talked about
muscle as an endocrine system for
anybody that's not familiar with
endocrinology that's basically hormones
so um is that what triggers the release
of bdnf is the actual contraction of the
muscle i mean it's certainly part of it
yes especially now when you think about
that balance of inflammation muscle also
releases interleukin-6 which people
always think of you know as the cytokine
storm as this interleukin that causes
all these damaging things down the line
but
truly muscle
as an organ secreting interleukin-6
actually has an anti-inflammatory effect
so
walk me through then when my my tissues
are at rest
the the metabolic rate is that the
tissues are repairing themselves like
how does that
they're just very active they're turning
over you know they have mitochondria
it's just an active tissue
they break down protein
you know build new protein it's just
this kind of balance between an anabolic
catabolic effect continuously turning
over
okay so anabolic being building muscle
catabolic being tearing it down um
talk to me because this is one of the
things that ends up making muscles so
critical for people to understand
as they get older more and more critical
you've talked about how muscle is
basically a storage place for
amino acids
and i know that like if somebody gets
severely burned they almost can't take
in enough amino acids
as you get older if you get sick muscle
if i'm not mistaken muscle is one of the
like most direct predictors of mortality
um that's amplitude if you want to
survive the more muscle you have the
more likely you will survive so what i'm
assuming that's like a form of catabolic
where the body's like yo we've got a
problem in the immune system we've got a
problem with in the case of burns trying
to
replenish the tissues so what is the
body breaking the muscle down into
so it typically breaks it down to amino
acids so it's an amino acid reservoir
and those amino acids are utilized for
fuels and it's really a storage form and
also
you know
it goes there's other proteins in the
body that may require it
but typically it's that amino acid
reservoir
it's really interesting so i've always
not always but certainly in my once i
became aware of what's really going on
in nutrition in the body
you recognize that
fat has this incredible role to play
which is you can imagine us
out foraging hunting and there's a
period where you don't have any and it's
a battery it's essentially like hey
mitochondria is going to need it for the
process of generating atp which is the
energy that actually keeps the cells
alive and allows them to function and
then so you're like whoa it's actually
really powerful in a context where we
can't just overeat overeat overeat you
get why the ability to store fat is this
incredibly powerful thing so i'm going
to store basically potential energy
fantastic
literally you're
you're the first person i'm aware of to
talk about
musculature as a storage mechanism as
well and being able to store
um many different things that the body
ends up needing um
you know
way you don't want to do that so you
don't want to rely on your store of
amino acids you don't you want to keep
that muscle as healthy as you can for as
long as you can and that's really where
this whole
kind of question of dietary protein
comes in because as we age and just
really overall there's only two ways to
stimulate muscle mass
and that's i'm sure you know from the
quest days
is dietary protein right that's
essential
and then resistance training but in
society right now we have we have really
two fundamental issues
we have this fixation on obesity and
that is the pathology
versus the cure which is under muscle so
that that's one venue
and then
you have this dietary component where
people are incredibly confused about
optimizing protein protein is incredibly
emotional for people
and it's really the key macronutrient
for maintaining muscle mass and also
helping with obesity diabetes
alzheimer's cardiovascular disease these
are pathologies
these are metabolic pathologies that can
be corrected by having healthy muscle
tissue it's interesting so let me ask a
super pointed question
you can only pull one lever so if you
you have two levers you have diet and
you have muscle mass
which would you have somebody pull for
longevity you can have an amazing diet
but you have very little muscle mass you
don't do a lot of exercising or you're
like my swimmer friend and you have
in just incredible output you're
exerting yourself tremendously you've a
great amount of lean body mass we all
know what swimmers look like they look
fantastic
but your diet is a twinkie diet like you
called it which of those two levers is
going to be more impactful
okay so i'm going to tell you what the
research shows and then i'm going to
tell you my personal experience word
so the research would say hey if you had
to prioritize one over the other
prioritize resistance training
okay
that being said in clinical practice i
have absolutely never seen that work
if they prioritize dietary protein and
they get that first meal right
by lunch they feel better i'm not asking
them to wait four weeks you nail that
first meal by the second meal you feel
better you want to deal with body
composition you want to deal with
optimal aging you want to overcome this
concept of anabolic resistance which we
can talk about
the only and most effective now again
this is my personal opinion based on
seeing hundreds and i've been at the
bedside of hundreds of dying people
geriatrics is no joke
and if i could pull the lever and go
back in time what would i tell them
you know i would say you've got to do
both but when you're young you have more
flexibility
and you can out train
a bad diet but as soon as those hormones
begin to change
if you have low quality protein and by
the way protein is utilized in a dose
response so it's a a meal dosage it's
really a 30 to 50 gram
meal dosing so that's between four and
you know five to six ounces of protein
per meal
and if you go under under that you are
below what's called this leucine
threshold and i i want to make this very
palatable for people so
basically there's essential amino acids
and out of these essential amino acids
that's really what determines the
quality of a person's diet and the
quality of protein so when they are sub
threshold of one particular amino acid
which is leucine if you eat food that is
sub threshold to that two and a half
grams of leucine
you will be skinny fat you will never
activate the proper mechanisms to turn
over muscle protein synthesis
and this is a huge problem in our
society
you know there's nutrient sensors in the
body
so hitting that particular amino acid
load which is really four to six ounces
easy and it's easy for people to anchor
their meals in you know four to six
ounces of protein and then you stimulate
your muscle tissue
which we know is an endocrine organ
let's talk about that if you're not
trying to bodybuild if you're not trying
to get bigger um so i'm thinking i know
somebody love her to death she's amazing
but her diet is ridiculous but she's
skinny her whole family's skinny it's
crazy and so i've always said i
guarantee if you look at her biomarker
she's going to be skinny fat she's going
to be probably pre-diabetic judging by
how she eats it's you know pure insanity
because i want to differentiate between
busting your ass in the gym and what
you're going to get from that and then
just like hey even if you don't care
about the gym even if you don't buy into
that
there's just a quality of tissue issue
and if you think of it as an organ it's
like saying the quality of the tissue of
your liver or your kidneys it's like
this matters so if people could do
one thing
and leave this conversation with nothing
else other than muscle is the organ of
longevity and eat high quality protein
animal protein and plant protein are
totally different and if you have a diet
of plant protein it is very hard to
sustain and calorically devastating
because you need between 25 and 40
percent more so it's like six cups of
quinoa for one small chicken breast if
you really wanted to think about the
amino acids necessary to stimulate that
tissue and listen that's not the only
way to do it could we add in
branched-chain amino acids to lower
quality protein absolutely but why would
you do that when we have
you know cattle or ruminants that have
that we've been consuming for two and a
half million years and have the capacity
to take low quality plant nutrition and
produce high quality
nutrition with that is nutrient dense
and highly bioavailable for humans so i
understand i've heard you say the same
thing like i understand people have they
may have a um a moral desire to eat
plant-based food and i get that due to
somebody who's absolutely i just love
animals and i long for the day where we
can lab grow meat and that there was
never an animal i'm involved in that
process but i'm also
just selfish enough to say i'm going to
protect my health
you know when you look at obviously
sustainable farming and things like that
i'm all for it i couldn't be more behind
that
but
wanting to understand sort of at a
mechanistic cellular level what's
happening and i don't care what the
answer is vegan vegetarian animal a mix
thereof
i just want to understand like at a
cellular level what's happening um and
to
get that i think understanding the
what branched chain amino acids are
why they matter and how the profiles
differ from plants to meat i think would
be really helpful yeah i i couldn't
agree with you more so really the
quality of our diet
and this is globally the quality of our
diet is largely dependent on protein so
there's 20 amino acids
and nine of those are essential
of those essential amino acids and
essential meaning i i cannot produce it
in my body exactly
so the key branch chain amino acids and
when you think about branched chain it's
just a structure right it's just a
nomenclature you've got leucine
isoleucine and baline and out of those
three which by the way should all be
consumed together because everything in
life has its own balance
of those three amino acids leucine is
the most relevant for protecting the
organ of longevity and on a cellular
level having the right amount at one
time dosed appropriately which is where
that two and a half grams that's from
the that's just from research you know
it's really truthfully it's between 1.8
to 2.5 grams of leucine which the
majority of people are not going to go
how much leucine is in my food right
it's not on the back of a label which
just goes to show you how protein has
been the black sheep of the
macronutrient family for decades
when you look at a label all it simply
says is protein but understanding on a
cellular level that really
eating protein at a meal centric dosing
meaning you at one time you're not
drinking protein shakes over a course of
two hours but at one meal at a boldest
amount you are getting
between 30 and 50 grams of protein which
would translate to
between four and six ounces of high
quality protein would reach that leucine
threshold so once you reach that leucine
threshold you trigger this
this complex called mtor
mtor is the mechanistic target of
rapamycin which then is actually a
nutrient sensor
anything below that the body's like i
don't care i'm not going to put on
muscle or i don't care i'm not going to
really stimulate this very expensive
elaborate process for the body
it doesn't care
so that's where you get skinny fat
because you're grazing all day at this
low threshold meal especially important
in aging because you don't have that
flexibility
and when i say aging i'm talking about
40s
you know you've got to stay on top of it
but once you reach that threshold
of arguably two and a half grams of
leucine which you could have a two
ounces of fish and then a scoop of
branched chain and get up that leucine
level but mechanistically you need that
branch chain that essential amino acid
to then
trigger the rest of what needs to happen
for muscle protein synthesis and listen
the way that they measure muscle protein
synthesis
it's not like you eat it and then you're
laying down protein it truly i mean
that's not an accurate assessment right
i would be
um not being truthful if i said that but
it really is a period of time over a
period of time as you continue to do
with anything correct
optimized habits
you then can protect your tissue
and protecting tissue is everything
you know and it's very dangerous because
when people do weight loss
you know you lose some fat but you also
lose tissue
and now we're in a situation where we're
not outside and we're not doing
resistance training
and we're not actually moving that
endocrine organ
so you know it becomes much more
difficult to maintain and recoup that
tissue and the tissue is just one aspect
it's truly the metabolic aspects
you know of the of muscle and if you
want to prevent diabetes
heart disease alzheimer's
cardiovascular you know cardiovascular
disease that whole spectrum
tissue you know muscle tissue will do
that for you and then you put on high
quality protein
you're going to keep inflammation low
you're going to keep calories in check
you're going to up regulate your
thermoeffective feeding these are all
really important you're going to do
you're going to have lower blood
pressure because some of the amino acids
one in particular helps lower blood
pressure
i mean this is amazing stuff it's a
muscle-centric approach to wellness and
the paradigm is totally wrong
yeah it feels very different like when
when i started working out you can
actually feel just the difference in in
a lot of things you can feel the
difference in mobility and strength and
just overall well-being
and then some of the data in terms of
how people bounce back from long-term
chronic illness i know in the cancer
community one of the the things they
look at is when muscle mass gets too low
they're just like they're they're one
illness away from demise and same thing
with old people it's like hey you might
be able to survive the flu if you've got
enough muscle to see you through
but if not then you could really be in
trouble so it's interesting to hear that
broken down i want to go back to what
you were saying about that first meal
which i think you're quite careful not
to necessarily refer to it as breakfast
but your first meal um getting getting
that right um i'd love to hear what
right is like in the real world am i
eating eggs am i eating chicken breast
am i eating quinoa like what am i eating
you are not eating
so if you get that first meal right if
your meal is bolus with protein you do a
few things
number one you stimulate your muscle
tissue which is arguably the most
important organ right but number two
there and there's really good data that
it actually helps with satiation
and blood sugar regulation so you are
not going to be chasing 90 minutes later
your um blood sugar you are not going to
be obsessed in your mind and not able to
focus because you want to eat or you
feel like you have to take a nap yeah i
encourage people to try to overeat um
steamed chicken breast it's like good
luck like you will tap out long before
you get obese that is for sure um so
what are give me some ideal protein
sources am i eating is it chicken breast
is it red meat
so we eat a lot of beef in our family
beef bison eggs
we are not a low fat family so you know
for breakfast for us might be half a
pound of bison each with a little bit of
olive oil and maybe some avocado but
we're low carb for that first meal we
tend to do carb back loading or if we're
going to have carbohydrates use
carbohydrates around a meal now my
husband is a seal so they you know they
kind of like
go crazy and train and then eat and
train that's navy seal for anybody
wondering
no arguably he's probably an animal but
it's okay um
so
that's how we but the first meal is
always the same why do you do carbs
later in the day that's interesting
because you've been up and you've been
utilizing your tissue so you depleted
your muscle glycogen essentially
i mean listen
the data would show in a 24-hour period
so i want to be very careful to say this
is my experience because the data will
say well in a 24 hour period how much
carbohydrates are you utilizing and i
would say it's much easier to backload
your carbohydrates or utilize them
around training perhaps post-workout so
i do believe that training low glycogen
state is very beneficial do you remember
fasted or do you have your first meal
i do so i work out fasted and do you
have a
strategy behind why you do that
so i think that training low i like my
body to become very proficient and and
efficient on its own
i like to be able to make all the
glucose i need
right and because my diet is high in
protein
there is what happens is it goes through
gluconeogenesis so truly for every 100
grams of protein that i eat my body
generates 60 grams of carbohydrates
itself so i am not reliant on quinoa for
breakfast or carbohydrates my body
becomes so good at making and generating
its own
that it allows me to eat any
carbohydrates in
you know truthfully i don't need a bunch
of carbs it when i work them in it would
be you know possibly if we had a really
busy day we have a little infant
you know and we have no child care so
we're just kind of
you know busy and we're training and you
know if i've gone for
a lot of training that day and i'm
running around chasing her i might have
you know and it's meal specific so
there's a carbohydrate threshold which
is how i like to think about
carbohydrates i might have
you know 20 grams of some kind of
carbohydrate
in the evening and and truly the carbs
that i love and everybody says this are
green leafy
you know vegetables but i really like
things like cilantro and
chives things that maybe have more
medicinal purposes
and that's really what we use
so
so herbs is medicine which one's what
effect
i am certainly not an expert on herbs
but i will tell you one of the things
that we use is
this isn't an herb but i'm just very
strategic so like in the morning i'll
use something called sun up green coffee
and it's it's this one company that i
just really love and i have no
connection to them but they have a
product that i think nobody knows about
that everybody should and it's raw green
coffee so it looks like tea i don't make
it i get it clear like that
it look it tastes like tea
and it really and it has a high amount
of polyphenols
which i know that there's a lot of
debate in but i believe in polyphenols
and what does what do the polyphenols do
for you
so they're antioxidant they have
numerous effects anti-cancer activity
and i will tell you that i am able to
maintain my body composition
by doing these very strategic things and
just being very conscientious
of utilizing
simple tools
that i have found incredibly helpful
like for example
jalapenos
using raw jalapenos with capsaicin you
know the whole goal is optimizing body
composition
and you utilize these in an you know
over a period of time in enough amounts
and the body generates its own effect
and listen this is totally subjective
you do have to control for calories
but there are things that we just as
scientists or as practitioners
physicians don't necessarily understand
but i can tell you that it works so i
use chlorogenic acid in the morning i've
never heard of that what is it that's
the green coffee that's why i use the
green color
genic acid yeah has high amounts of
chlorogenic acid you're going to try
those syllables put together chlorogenic
acid okay it's a compound that helps
with fatty acid metabolism
very interesting okay so we have our
green coffee um and then uh what else
are we doing in terms of um
herbs
um a lot of cilantro
and they you know there's some believe
and through what mechanism i don't know
but very detoxifying
you know a lot of individuals with quote
heavy metals will utilize a cilantro
based kind of compound
cilantro parsley chives
garlic people are like i'm not coming
your house that's all right
but it would be interesting because i
think that that's the you know i think
we're all looking for ways
to
optimize longevity at the not just at
the end of life so it doesn't really
matter if you live to 100 versus 105 or
95 to 100 if the last five years suck
right so how do we live
a way that
surpasses what we've seen for longevity
but the quality
of our life
is together and that's the question is
not the length right so it's not
quantity of life it truly is quality
towards the end so really i'm starting
to experiment with these things as it
relates to longevity
and quality
really fast give people a bit of a
breakdown on your background in
geriatrics one i don't know that
everybody knows what geriatrics is um
and then two i know you spent a lot of
time in palliative care so what that is
and sort of the it's giving you sort of
a tough edge and no approach to
this that i really respect so first what
is geriatrics and palliative care and
what have you learned from it yeah and
and i'm going to tell you where
muscle-centric medicine came from there
was a turning point moment that was
during my fellowship um
so geriatrics is really it's taking care
of aging and it's over the it's 65 and
older and that's what's considered
geriatrics and then palliative care is
the end of life so you
are really at the end of your life
whether it's a month or so
and that's really transitioning to the
other side whatever that other side is
so when i did my fellowship at washu it
was a two-year fellowship and part of
the deal was i was going to get to do
nutritional sciences so i've trained
seven years in nutritional sciences but
the deal
the deal is
in order to do clinical research so i
did two years of clinical research
part of the way that it worked was as a
physician i also had to have clinical
duties
part of those clinical duties the
agreement was right there's always a
give and take
the agreement was i got to do obesity
medicine and run a weight loss clinic
and
and image people's brains and be part of
you glycemic lamps and do all this
really rad stuff
but in order for me to do that
i had to take care of people in nursing
homes
at the end of life
in the hospital
and geriatrics and i'm sure everybody
many people have had aging parents
it is not i mean
diseases of aging are heart crushing
bone
sucking like it is
so harsh
and that's why i feel so passionate
about this message because i've actually
done the work and sat at the bedside
of these people
you know and at the end at that moment
in time you can look back and you know
people have a lot of regrets and i will
never forget and that muscle-centric
medicine came from a very specific
moment
part of the research i was doing is i
was imaging people's brains it was obese
brains midlife
incredible women around
you know late 40s early 50s
and i have to change the name of this
woman so we'll call her sarah and sarah
was the nicest woman and she had three
kids she'd been overweight her whole
life
and i'd sit with her you know we do
24-hour euglycemic clamps sit with her
and you really get to know these people
you see them at multiple points in the
study and uh one of the parts of the
study was imaging her brain
just to see what her brain looked like
and
when
we imaged her brain she had a lot of
like flattening of her matter and it
came from midlife obesity and we knew
that within you know really 10 years
down the line
she's going to have
alzheimer's
what is the rapping of the matter what
is that so the gray matter right so that
the brains the the wider the waistline
the lower the brain volume
so alzheimer's they're meant there are
many multiple different aspects of
alzheimer's but alzheimer's is type 3
diabetes of the brain
it's a metabolic illness
that can be
prevented just like diabetes just like
cardiovascular disease just like
hypertension and listen i i want to say
this with a little bit of reserve
because there are genetic components
however
lifestyle choices mid-life having access
to the right information changes the
trajectory of aging i was so heartbroken
when we reviewed her fmri study i was
heartbroken because all she told me was
you know i've emotionally eaten my whole
life i have three children i'm a
stay-at-home mom and i put everybody
first
and her habits were so deeply ingrained
and she was obese her muscle tissue
wasn't there
she literally in the next decade was
going to have alzheimer's and she had no
idea what she's in store for or what her
family was in store for and at that
moment i knew that chasing body fat was
the wrong thing to do
it was all about muscle as this
metabolic organ
and if she had turned her attention
protecting that
because it controls body composition
metabolically the the bigger the
waistline the smaller the brain why yeah
what mechanistically is happening
because it is very inflammatory so
there's insulin receptors in the brain
you know it can affect the bro the
blood-brain barrier
insulin resistance in the body and
insulin resistance in the brain
and
one of the other things and we'll talk
about muscle but the
the the protein component affects
satiety so that overeating that
emotional eating
your body is going to feed until it gets
the protein that it needs
and that's something super interesting
looking at cravings from that
perspective yeah and it's actually
called the protein protein leverage
hypothesis
where and this is well maintained
throughout species
where they will feed so you'll continue
to eat and overeat and overeat if you're
eating a low protein diet until you
reach that protein need
for these satiety mechanisms to shut
itself up
very troubling
so now give me
what does muscle do
that
interrupts that
why is it anti-inflammatory like if we
look at what i just laid out is how we
get too much insulin into the system
what's muscles roll in
so muscle is the largest site for
glucose disposal
glucose in and of itself is cytotoxic
it is
really critical to get glucose out of
the bloodstream and take it up
one of the ways the largest site
for disposal is actually muscle tissue
the more muscle you have the more
metabolically healthy
it is the more that it's actually
utilizing nutrients appropriately
the more carbohydrate flexibility you
actually have
so it's in and of itself protective
and we talked about when you when you
contract it by
secreting myokines
it is anti-inflammatory so if fat is the
nemesis of muscle talk to me about what
the muscles are secreting um this isn't
uh interleukin 6 i'm familiar with only
because of what's going on with
coronavirus so that's sort of cytokine
storms and stuff is that's become more
people are talking about it more but the
other stuff like what you just said
which i i couldn't even tell you what
you just said um
what's that called again and why is it
anti-inflammatory so the interleukin-6
is really the big one that's what muscle
is famous for but when you think about
muscle tissue as it relates to
inflammation and obesity and really
protecting sarah the story that i told
you
if she had been able to get her tissue
under control just mechanistically from
getting her protein intake up
right and making sure that that tissue
was emptied
but because she was largely inactive and
you know there's this this concept where
when the muscle is full everything
starts feeling back into the tissue or
it just can't get in
so basically you have an increase
remember there was this whole big
discussion about branch chain branch
chain amino acids cause diabetes because
everyone with elevated glucose also had
elevated branched chain amino acids i've
never heard that before tell me more
there's some research that had come out
where people had mistakenly
said well those with elevated levels of
branched chain amino acids it correlates
to high level you know it correlates to
different amino acids in the bloodstream
correct and actually that's absolutely
true but not for the reason people think
the reason it was true is because
branched chain amino acids are utilized
by the muscle
but there's let me guess so
this is that backup mechanism right so
the branch and amino acids should be
going into the muscle but they're full
what are they full with they're full of
glucose no full of glucose they're full
of fat
they're just full they can't accept any
more substrate because they're not being
used exactly now we're on to some now
we're on to it so these diseases of
obesity these diseases of being over fat
they're not diseases of being over fat
they are diseases of impaired muscle
so if you fix
that muscle tissue
and that's through lifestyle keeping
inflammation low keeping calories in
check and truly we are domesticated as a
planet can we define fix
so when we say fit because if you had
stopped shy of the word fixed i would
have said add more muscle which is where
i always expect you to go um is this a
a game of quantity and quality
primarily quality um
these are great questions and i
i don't think anybody knows the answer
and here's why
because muscle is the most under
appreciated organ
we have percentages of body fat that we
know are not great
but we don't know i don't know what
percent muscle mass you should be
you don't know what percent muscle mass
i should be
and this is
so important to understand because if we
really truly want to help obesity
alzheimer's cardiovascular disease
it's really about optimizing muscle
tissue and nobody knows that answer i
would say from a professional opinion
quality and quantity matter of course
i'm not talking about in the extremes of
you know a bodybuilder in the olympia
although that's incredibly healthy
tissue right oh can i tell you a secret
here's something i would love to know
how does muscle mass correlate with um
surviving coronavirus
i thought about that kind of early on
and i thought
i do wonder
well if you think about it the higher
the muscle mass the better the
protection against all cause mortality
and morbid
just in general crazy people need to let
that one sink in across all cause
mortality
i agree so listen if someone goes and
they're on a vent
or they're aging i mean what are the
things that are going to be most
important
muscle tissue
you want to survive you've got to be
able to support your system
yeah man it's crazy muscle muscle muscle
so now let's talk about how do we get
some muscle so obviously we need to eat
we need to get our leucine levels right
we need to
eat a certain amount of protein which i
think you said roughly one gram per lean
body mass
that's the recommended amount i actually
that's what is would be considered in
the literature one gram per pound lean
muscle mass and i would say that's a
great starting point
i would say it should be
one gram per pound ideal body weight
okay
so the lean muscle mass is very very
plus a little bit of fat you're saying
yeah sure whatever you want as long as
calories park me i'm 180 pounds
grams of protein 180
yes sir okay
and then you know what's your caloric
target we would you know i would
probably break up your
protein meals and 50 grams or so could
you go over yeah
would you have much metabolic benefit no
so 50 grams of protein per meal so
seven times you know six would be 32
grams so i mean brother you're gonna be
eating a lot
or if you didn't want to do that you
would have a lower dose of protein and
then how to add in your branch chain
amino acids
so that's one strategy and then you
asked about fat so fat is more you know
for men i like to keep them a minimum of
80 grams for hormone production so i
would say a minimum of 80 grams of fat
but again this is all based on calories
and carbohydrates ah take it or leave it
and i'll tell you what is more important
is also as you age and we all become
more mature i hate to admit that i'm
aging but we are is that you actually
have to get that meal threshold right so
you would be doing yourself a service
by getting 50 grams of protein
per meal because you're going to get a
robust
response for muscle protein synthesis
and anabolic resistance mechanistically
the body becomes
kind of um immune or desensitized to
amino acids
so you require more amino acids at one
time
to get the sensing more robust
and especially in aging like in
geriatric population you need that
sensing mechanism to be very robust and
that's where your amino acids come in
and getting that you know amount per
meal correct so you overcome this
anabolic resistance
and to lead into resistance exercise
right
that is essential
and um there's a lot of questions or
someone you know if someone is aging
there's some great work out there from
mcmaster university and they say you
know they've shown that it's not the
heavy weight it's the two fatigue
ability and exhaustion that's
interesting it is interesting that they
would get the same benefit because for a
long time i said go out and work as hard
as you possibly can until you want to
quit at least twice or throw up
and that may not be
the the
that may not be a overarching
recommendation so really having a
well-designed trained program
you know planned out program is
essential and you'll respond quicker if
you're under trained or d trained right
and then the more advanced you get the
less gains you're going to make but
resistance training is key
i love it i love your approach if you
were going to make
one recommendation for people to make
one change that would have the biggest
impact on their health
what one change would you have them
make optimize optimize your
i only get to pick one only one so i
want to know are they eating more
chicken breasts are they hitting the gym
sleeping better whatever they're gonna
eat more red meat they're gonna optimize
their protein intake number one thing
that they can do
i love it look i love your whole
approach i think this is so powerful and
so important and i hope people take it
seriously muscle will change your life i
will just tell you that from experience
um where can people connect with you so
i'm very active on instagram dr
gabrielle lyon l-y-o-n
um and then there's a link i have a
youtube channel there's a link in my
link tree in instagram um i have a free
protocol on my website for people who
are just getting started and interested
in a protein centric approach and that's
dr gabrielle lyon.com
twitter same name facebook
and i have a newsletter where i always
vet scientific information and i put a
few studies that i think are incredibly
relevant and also great resources so
it's very well curated nice i love it
well guys subscribe to that newsletter
and speaking of subscribing if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
here and until next time my friends be
legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential